The Joe Rogan experience.
There's psychological needs that are just as valuable and important as physical
needs. Like we know we have needs for nutrients. We know needs for water.
We have needs psychological for, for all sorts of different things.
Our communities are incredibly important. Love is incredibly important.
Family is incredibly, you know,
I know some people that are older men that, uh,
have been bachelors their whole lives and they're childless. And now they're,
you know, they just,
they don't have a deep connection with anybody and they get to this very weird,
strange place where they're like,
is this it now I'm 70 years old and I've never really, uh, had children.
And I don't know what to do. And this is, this is my life now. And it's, they,
they they've, all their friends have had families now and their families.
A lot of times the kids are grown up and it becomes very, very strange.
You know, I thought about that a lot interviewed this guy, um,
professor John Cassio at the university of Chicago,
who's the leading expert in the world alone in the, this.
And he said this thing to me, that it's,
so it's a bit like what the woman in said what a lonely way to.
Live your life. He studying.
Quite actually, but the, uh.
<Laugh> but he had.
This really interesting, this very simple point, but he just said,
if you think about the circumstances where we evolved, right?
If you got separated from the tribe, if you were alone, right,
you were depressed and anxious for a really good reason.
You were about to be eaten. Yes. But you were in terrible danger.
If you got injured, no one would help. You would die. Right. So all the, he,
he showed. So when, as you know, when we're, when we're stressed,
we release a H hormone called cortisol.
He showed this interesting experiment that I wrote back in the book being
acutely lonely is as stressful as being punched in the face by stranger,
when it comes to cortisol release, right.
That's how deeply we are resistant to loneliness. Right? Right.
It's a signal telling you to get back to the tribe. That's why we bought,
it's a really important signal. If humans hadn't had that signal,
we wouldn't be here. Right. Um, and I think you're right.
So when you look at these, these men, if you have an isolated,
there was this woman. So I covered this incredible,
this movement that happened in Berlin on a big anonymous housing project where
no one knew each other. And they came together to protest.
It was a woman who was about to kill herself, cuz she was about to be evicted.
And the whole housing project came together to say,
she should be allowed to stay in her home and they should have a rent freeze.
And it's an amazing story. I tell it in the book,
but there's something one of the women said to me that I, I never got,
she's called Neman. She'd grown up in Turkey and she'd come to Germany.
I think when she was 17. And she said, when I grew up in Turkey,
what I called my home was my village and everyone in it.
And then I came to live in the Western world and I learned that what you're
meant to call home is just your four walls. And if you're lucky your family
and then this protest again,
and we all got to know each other and this whole place became my home.
And I think of everywhere here is home now. And, and, and she realized that,
that we are homeless in some sense in the Western world,
that our humans have a need for a sense of belonging.
And our sense of home is too small to meet our sense of home, belonging,
belonging. There's a wonderful, uh,
Bosnian writer called Alexander Hayman who said, um,
home is where people notice when you're not there. Right.
And a lot of us like these guys,
you're talking about these older guys who notices if they're not there. Right.
Probably no one, probably they are in, in a sense homeless. Yeah. Right.
They are spiritually homeless. And um, I say that as I'm not a religious person,
I don't mean that's. I go.
Through what you're saying. I hear.
What you're saying. It's very powerful. Did you know what I mean? Yeah.
It's and so I think it's about, and,
and this comes back to think about how different that is,
what everything we are talking about.
Think how different our conversation has been to what my doctor told me when I
was teenager. And I go in and I say, I'm in real pain.
And I feel like pain is leaking out at me and I can't control it. And he says,
you've just got a malfunction in your brain. Right?
What are the worst things about that? There are many things wrong with that.
Firstly, what he said to me is not true. Um, uh, I'm sure he believed it.
I think he was misinformed. I don't think he was deliberately lying to me,
but what he said was not true, but also to me,
biggest problem with just telling this exclusively biological story about
depression and anxiety, there's some real biological factors, of course,
is it cuts us off from having this conversation, right?
Mm-hmm <affirmative> all those people you were talking about who are so
insistent as I was that their depression is just the result of a chemical
imbalance. If you think that it disconnects you from the source of your pain,
it, you,
you are just biologically broken and presumably always gonna be biologically
broken. When the conversation we are having, which is a different conversation,
it's a difficult conversation. It's a nuanced conversation. It's not simplistic.
It's not one problem, one lever to solve it. It's a much deeper and more,
uh, textured way of thinking. That is the conversation we have to have.
That's what the best scientists in the world are telling us the world health
organization. And my worry is, um, we're just being pushed in the,
like you said, that, that,
that very good metaphor about driving 37 miles in the wrong direction, right?
Mm-hmm, <affirmative>, we're just driving in the wrong direction.
We're driving away from the sources of our pain rather than towards it,
where it can be understood and solved.
Of course it's always gonna be some pain in human life.
But the fact that we have this one in five people taking a psychiatric drug,
you know, uh, I think the figure is one in 10,
13 year old boys is taking a stimulant drug to make them focus.
I think the figure is 30% of old people in,
in retirement homes are being given antipsychotic drugs to shut them the up,
cuz they're rebelling against the way they're being treated in between one in
four middle aged women in the United States is taking a chemical antidepressant
at any given time in four in, in four one in four. You're talking about the,
a society that, I mean the figures about how many children it's much lower,
but it's so much more extreme. The number,
the number of toddlers who've been given antipsychotics in the United States is
just off the scale. Right?
What I think Dr. Sammy to Mimi has written about this.
There's some extraordinary figure. I'm not getting the figure slightly wrong,
but it's something like a majority of children in foster care in the United
States are being given stimulant drugs basically to shut them up. Yeah. That's.
That's a disturbing one,
the Ritalin and various stimulants that they give to children. Um,
what's that about? What's the cause of that?
Well, I think it's related,
I I've researched this much less than the other things we've talked about. Okay.
But from, it came up a lot in the conversations that I had,
there are many things going on here. One of them is, um,
a lot of the, so a lot of the, not all of them,
a lot of the causes of depression and anxiety that I wrote about I couldn't
help,
but notice reading all the research into being the scientists also can lead to,
um, decrease in focus and attention. So for example,
if you are dead end at work and you, you feel controlled all the time,
you have to yourself to get through it. It's harder. Attention's a muscle,
right?
It's harder to bring your brain back to focus like Joe wanted to just go and
collapse and watch, you know, watch whatever was on, you know,
the bachelor or whatever.
I don't think Joe would've watched the bachelor actually,
whatever would've been on the tell on the TV, um, that one.
In his full state of depression, the bachelor, I was a line.
To, I can't do it. It was prepared to take Oxy,
but not to go to that level of self harm. Right. But the, but the, or,
or think about loneliness, right?
There's really professor caspo was showing this. If you are lonely,
that triggers what's called hypervigilance. Right. Again, for very good reason,
if you're on your own in the Savannahs of Africa, right?
You wanna be hypervigilant. Of course. So you find it.
One of the things that was most challenging to me is this evidence that the
people with the lowest levels of attention problems and depression and anxiety
in the United States are the Amish. Right? And I am a atheist gay,
liberal. So the idea of going,
like learning something from the Amish was initially challenging to me.
And I've gotta admit, I felt really humble by going to spending time in,
I went to this village called Alhart Grae,
which is just outside Fort Wayne in Indiana. And you know,
there's still a lot I disagree with about the Amish, probably wrong,
not least cuz I just re-watched witness. But uh, the, the <laugh> but,
but you know, they, I could see that they've got,
so there's very interesting about the Amish. As you know, when you turn 16,
if you're an Amish,
you got to leave and go and live in what they call the English world, our world,
right.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> and then you decide whether to come back about 80% decide
to come back 20%.
Don't it's one of the reasons why the Amish is never counted as a cult cuz no
cult would do that. Right?
No cults gonna tell you to leave for two years and then decide whether to come
back fact the exact opposite. So they have lived in our world,
they know our world really well.
And having this very challenging conversation with, um, what's his name?
Lauren beachy. His name is an Amish guy there who said there was so beer,
it goes back to the weight conversation we had. He said, um, look,
there's loads of things I miss. He talked about missing that seventies show.
He said, I used to love driving in trucks cuz they obviously don't drive.
They don't use altity off the grid. And he said, but you know, if I kept those,
I wouldn't spend time with my family. I wouldn't spend time with my children.
I wouldn't, I wouldn't know who my neighbors were. And he,
he said this very challenging thing. He said, you know, weight Watchers.
And I said, yeah. And he said, well,
the idea of weight Watchers is you can only lose weight together as a group.
Right. It helps or not only,
but it helps you to lose weight together as a group that you would find it
harder on your own. This is like that. And I said, what are you saying? Right?
The Arish is like weight Watchers for the problems of Western and civilization.
And he's like, yeah, that's what I'm saying. And to me that was so challenging.
The idea that you've gotta give, cuz we,
it comes back to what you're saying about junk values in our culture.
We're told the solution is always to get more.
And the idea that the solution is to have less and be present more is really
challenging.
Right?
Well don't I don't even think it's about having less it's about what they're
doing is look, think about what the Amish are doing. First of all,
massive sense of community, right? They're very connected.
They're not using cell phones. They're not using email.
So the community is also based on one to one real social cues,
real social interaction, which is critical.
It's a big part of being a human being.
And it's one of the more absent things in modern society. Two physical labor,
they're involved in a lot of physical labor because they don't use electricity.
They don't use power tools. They there's so many things that they don't do.
So because of their culture, they're making their own homes or right.
So they have a, a vested interest in helping each other,
working together as a community.
And they have a deep sense of satisfaction of constructing each other's homes.
You construct my home with me. I help you build your home.
They take care of their animals. They take care of their crops.
They take there's, there's a real connection with where they get their food. Um,
a real connection with where they're they live their community.
The sense of just that, the whole,
the sense of belonging to something that's bigger than you. It's a,
there's so many factors involved in their happiness that you can kind of
see where, yeah, there's a lot of wacky with the,
the cult aspects of being an Amish person. And,
but what you get out of it,
it's almost like if you had a self-help group that subscribed to all the
positive benefits of being Amish and they just called it like regrounding or
something like that, you just go out there and you become a part of nature.
And I mean, that's,
that seems like a co-op that seems like some sort of a farm based co-op right?
Yeah. I build each other's houses. Stay together.
You don't have to wear sexy clothes. Let's just all wear the same.
It's no big deal.